# pulicaria-dilutes-pasteuria
Data and code for the "Mixed evidence for a dilution effect in Daphnia communities infected by a bacterial parasite" manuscript.

### Abstract
The dilution effect hypothesis suggests that greater host biodiversity can reduce infectious disease transmission. While the dilution effect appears to operate in a variety of host-pathogen systems, it is not universal. Most prior studies have only investigated the dilution effect for a single parasite, even though most host communities are infected with multiple parasites. In this study, we asked whether a host community that has previously shown evidence for a dilution effect for one parasite, would dilution also occur for a second parasite? Daphnia communities have smaller fungal (Metschnikowia bicuspidata) epidemics when host communities are dominated by less susceptible ‘diluter’ hosts. We used a paired experimental and field study approach to examine the potential within Daphnia host communities for a second parasite, the bacterium Pasteuria ramosa, to exhibit a dilution effect. First, we experimentally examined the effect of increasing densities of three potential diluter host species on Pasteuria prevalence in susceptible Daphnia dentifera. Pasteuria prevalence in susceptible D. dentifera was reduced by 36.9% for each additional D. pulicaria individual per beaker, reduced by 15.5% for each additional D. retrocurva individual per beaker, and increased by 1.8% for each additional non-competent D. dentifera individual per beaker. Second, we analyzed variation in the size of Pasteuria epidemics in the dominant crustacean grazer, D. dentifera, in Midwestern U.S. lakes based on the Daphnia host community. In the field, only the density of the primary host, D. dentifera, was significantly correlated with Pasteuria prevalence. Thus, while the experimental evidence suggests the potential for greater D. pulicaria densities to dilute Pasteuria prevalence in D. dentifera, we did not find evidence supporting dilution in the field. Our finding that a second parasite infecting the same host community does not necessarily show the same dilution effect at the field scale suggests the underlying biodiversity–disease mechanisms may differ even among parasites that share similar hosts. 